README.md, before:

# Arduino Debugging

When working on an Arduino sketch or library, you often find yourself writing an awful lot of `Serial.print(...)` statements for debugging. It can be quite hard to keep track of where all of this data comes from, and it's a pain to remove or comment out all of it when preparing for a release.

This library aims at facilitating the debugging process by providing simple macros that add no overhead whatsoever when debugging is disabled. It can also automatically print out information about the context, like function name, filename and line number.

On top of that, it can be used for the Arduino, as well as desktop C++. This makes it easier to develop on your computer, run unit tests on your computer, and then compile for the Arduino using the exact same code.

## Dependencies

You can install the [Arduino PrintStream library](https://github.com/tttapa/Arduino-PrintStream), that adds more advanced printing options, with `std::cout`-like syntax for the Arduino (using the `<<`-operator).  
If you're tight on memory, or if you don't want to add the extra dependency, you can also use this debugging library without installing the PrintStream library. (See [below](#not-including-printstream))

## Installation

The easiest way is to just paste the `Debug.hpp` file into your sketch or project folder. If you're using the Arduino IDE, you can use `CTRL+K` (or _Sketch > Show Sketch Folder_) and paste it there.

## API

The library provides five macros:

1. `DEBUG(x)`  
This is the easiest one: it just prints out `x` to the debug output if debugging is enabled. It also terminates the line.
2. `DEBUGREF(x)`  
This one behaves similar to `DEBUG`, but it also prints out a reference to the filename and line number where it was called.
3. `DEBUGFN(x)`  
Rather than printing the entire filename, this one prints out just the function name and the line number where it was called.
4. `DEBUGTIME(x)`  
This macro prints the time since start (format `h:m:s.ms`). This is only supported on Arduino.
5. `DEBUGVAL(...)`
This is a variadic macro, and will print the name and value of up to 10 different expressions or variables.

There's also a helper macro that can be used inside of any of the first 4 macros above:
`NAMEDVALUE`  
It will print out the name and value of an expression or variable.

## Example

```cpp
#include "Debug.hpp"

void setup() {
  Serial.begin(115200);
  while (!Serial);
}

void loop() {
  DEBUG( "This is the result of `DEBUG`" );
  DEBUGREF( "This is the result of `DEBUGREF`" );
  DEBUGFN( "This is the result of `DEBUGFN`" );
  DEBUGTIME( "This is the result of `DEBUGTIME`" );
  int a = 1, b = 2, c = 3;
  DEBUGVAL( a, b, c );
  DEBUGVAL( log10(1000) - 2 );
  DEBUGVAL( millis() );
  DEBUGVAL( Serial.read() );
  someFunction(42);
  DEBUG("");
  delay(5000);
}

int someFunction(int parameter) {
  DEBUGFN( NAMEDVALUE(parameter) );
  return parameter;
}
```
When debugging is enabled the code above produces the following output:
```
This is the result of `DEBUG`
[/home/pieter/GitHub/Arduino-Debugging/Example/Example.ino:12]:	This is the result of `DEBUGREF`
[void loop() @ line 13]:	This is the result of `DEBUGFN`
[0:2:11.085]:	This is the result of `DEBUGTIME`
a = 1, b = 2, c = 3
log10(1000) - 2 = 1.00
millis() = 131085
Serial.read() = -1
[int someFunction(int) @ line 26]:	parameter = 42
```

## Enabling debugging and selecting the output stream

The easiest way to enable debugging, is to define the output stream before including the `Debug.hpp` file:
```cpp
#define DEBUG_OUT Serial
#include "Debug.hpp"
```
These two lines will enable debugging to the output `Serial`.

If you want to disable debugging, just comment out (or remove) the first line. Now no output will be printed, and no overhead will be caused by your `DEBUG(...)` statements, because they will be removed before the compilation even starts.

## Adding a 'Debug' menu in the Arduino IDE (Optional)

If you are going to be debugging a lot, it might be usefull to just add a menu option in the IDE to disable/enable debugging.  
This can be easily done by editing the `boards.txt` file.

Open the `boards.txt` file of the board you are using. If you're using version 1.8.x of the Arduino IDE, it'll be located in `~/.arduino15/packages/<package-name>/hardware/<architecture>/<version>/` or `C:\users\<username>\AppData\Local\Arduino15\packages\<package-name>\hardware\<architecture>\<version>\`
Open it using a text editor (e.g. Gedit on Linux, or Notepad on Windows).

First, create the menu option by adding the following line at the top of the file:
```
menu.debug=Debug output
```

Then for your board, just add the different debug options.  
For example, if you're using an Arduino UNO:
```
uno.menu.debug.None=None
uno.menu.debug.None.build.debug_output=
uno.menu.debug.Serial=Serial
uno.menu.debug.Serial.build.debug_output=-DDEBUG_OUT=Serial
```
Then add the debugging to the compilation options by adding the line:
```
uno.build.extra_flags={build.debug_output}
```

If your board already has an `extra_flags` entry, just add ` {build.debug_output}` to the end (separated by a space).

A complete list of all the AVR boards and their added debug options can be found in [boards.txt.example](boards.txt.example).

Finally, restart the IDE.  
If you now open your the `Tools` menu in the Arduino IDE, you should see the debug options:
![Screenshot-Arduino-IDE-Debug](Screenshot-Arduino-IDE-Debug.png)

## A note on memory usage
`DEBUGREF` saves the file name and line number in PROGMEM. `DEBUGFN` stores the function name in RAM, and the line number in PROGMEM. This is because the preprocessor doesn't know the function name, only the compiler does.

If you want to save RAM on your own debug statements, you can use the `F(...)` macro, as usual:
```cpp
DEBUG( F( "I am a debug statement stored in PROGMEM" ) );
```
## Not including PrintStream

The PrintStream library contains some useful features, like printing in hexadecimal or binary, setting floating point precision, etc.  
However, there are good reasons why you would not want to include it (e.g. it adds another dependency, it costs a few bytes of extra memory).

You can still use this Debugging library without installing the PrintStream library, by using the macro `PRINTSTREAM_FALLBACK`:
```cpp
#define PRINTSTREAM_FALLBACK
#include "Debug.hpp"
```

Commit message:

Disable flushing by default Add support for ESP32 & ESP8266 without flushing, and add note in the README about flushing. Fixes #1

README.md, after:

# Arduino Debugging

When working on an Arduino sketch or library, you often find yourself writing an awful lot of `Serial.print(...)` statements for debugging. It can be quite hard to keep track of where all of this data comes from, and it's a pain to remove or comment out all of it when preparing for a release.

This library aims at facilitating the debugging process by providing simple macros that add no overhead whatsoever when debugging is disabled. It can also automatically print out information about the context, like function name, filename and line number.

On top of that, it can be used for the Arduino, as well as desktop C++. This makes it easier to develop on your computer, run unit tests on your computer, and then compile for the Arduino using the exact same code.

## Dependencies

You can install the [Arduino PrintStream library](https://github.com/tttapa/Arduino-PrintStream), that adds more advanced printing options, with `std::cout`-like syntax for the Arduino (using the `<<`-operator).  
If you're tight on memory, or if you don't want to add the extra dependency, you can also use this debugging library without installing the PrintStream library. (See [below](#not-including-printstream))

## Installation

The easiest way is to just paste the `Debug.hpp` file into your sketch or project folder. If you're using the Arduino IDE, you can use `CTRL+K` (or _Sketch > Show Sketch Folder_) and paste it there.

## API

The library provides five macros:

1. `DEBUG(x)`  
This is the easiest one: it just prints out `x` to the debug output if debugging is enabled. It also terminates the line.
2. `DEBUGREF(x)`  
This one behaves similar to `DEBUG`, but it also prints out a reference to the filename and line number where it was called.
3. `DEBUGFN(x)`  
Rather than printing the entire filename, this one prints out just the function name and the line number where it was called.
4. `DEBUGTIME(x)`  
This macro prints the time since start (format `h:m:s.ms`). This is only supported on Arduino.
5. `DEBUGVAL(...)`
This is a variadic macro, and will print the name and value of up to 10 different expressions or variables.

There's also a helper macro that can be used inside of any of the first 4 macros above:
`NAMEDVALUE`  
It will print out the name and value of an expression or variable.

## Example

```cpp
#include "Debug.hpp"

void setup() {
  Serial.begin(115200);
  while (!Serial);
}

void loop() {
  DEBUG( "This is the result of `DEBUG`" );
  DEBUGREF( "This is the result of `DEBUGREF`" );
  DEBUGFN( "This is the result of `DEBUGFN`" );
  DEBUGTIME( "This is the result of `DEBUGTIME`" );
  int a = 1, b = 2, c = 3;
  DEBUGVAL( a, b, c );
  DEBUGVAL( log10(1000) - 2 );
  DEBUGVAL( millis() );
  DEBUGVAL( Serial.read() );
  someFunction(42);
  DEBUG("");
  delay(5000);
}

int someFunction(int parameter) {
  DEBUGFN( NAMEDVALUE(parameter) );
  return parameter;
}
```
When debugging is enabled the code above produces the following output:
```
This is the result of `DEBUG`
[/home/pieter/GitHub/Arduino-Debugging/Example/Example.ino:12]:	This is the result of `DEBUGREF`
[void loop() @ line 13]:	This is the result of `DEBUGFN`
[0:2:11.085]:	This is the result of `DEBUGTIME`
a = 1, b = 2, c = 3
log10(1000) - 2 = 1.00
millis() = 131085
Serial.read() = -1
[int someFunction(int) @ line 26]:	parameter = 42
```

## Enabling debugging and selecting the output stream

The easiest way to enable debugging, is to define the output stream before including the `Debug.hpp` file:
```cpp
#define DEBUG_OUT Serial
#include "Debug.hpp"
```
These two lines will enable debugging to the output `Serial`.

If you want to disable debugging, just comment out (or remove) the first line. Now no output will be printed, and no overhead will be caused by your `DEBUG(...)` statements, because they will be removed before the compilation even starts.

## Adding a 'Debug' menu in the Arduino IDE (Optional)

If you are going to be debugging a lot, it might be usefull to just add a menu option in the IDE to disable/enable debugging.  
This can be easily done by editing the `boards.txt` file.

Open the `boards.txt` file of the board you are using. If you're using version 1.8.x of the Arduino IDE, it'll be located in `~/.arduino15/packages/<package-name>/hardware/<architecture>/<version>/` or `C:\users\<username>\AppData\Local\Arduino15\packages\<package-name>\hardware\<architecture>\<version>\`
Open it using a text editor (e.g. Gedit on Linux, or Notepad on Windows).

First, create the menu option by adding the following line at the top of the file:
```
menu.debug=Debug output
```

Then for your board, just add the different debug options.  
For example, if you're using an Arduino UNO:
```
uno.menu.debug.None=None
uno.menu.debug.None.build.debug_output=
uno.menu.debug.Serial=Serial
uno.menu.debug.Serial.build.debug_output=-DDEBUG_OUT=Serial
```
Then add the debugging to the compilation options by adding the line:
```
uno.build.extra_flags={build.debug_output}
```

If your board already has an `extra_flags` entry, just add ` {build.debug_output}` to the end (separated by a space).

A complete list of all the AVR boards and their added debug options can be found in [boards.txt.example](boards.txt.example).

Finally, restart the IDE.  
If you now open your the `Tools` menu in the Arduino IDE, you should see the debug options:
![Screenshot-Arduino-IDE-Debug](Screenshot-Arduino-IDE-Debug.png)

## Flushing the Serial port after each message
By default, the DEBUG macros don't block. They simply write the message to the 
transmit buffer of the Arduino, and it gets sent out asynchronously, while the 
code after the debug statement is executing.  
The advantage is that it doesn't affect the timing (as long as you're not
sending more data than can fit in the transmit buffer).  
On the other hand, it might mean that not all debuggin information is printed
when the Arduino crashes.  
If that's the case you can define the macro `FLUSH_ON_EVERY_DEBUG_STATEMENT` to
flush the Serial port after each line of debugging information.

Flushing is not supported on ESP32 and ESP8266 boards, because the `Print` class
on these platforms doesn't have a `flush` method.

## A note on memory usage
`DEBUGREF` saves the file name and line number in PROGMEM. `DEBUGFN` stores the function name in RAM, and the line number in PROGMEM. This is because the preprocessor doesn't know the function name, only the compiler does.

If you want to save RAM on your own debug statements, you can use the `F(...)` macro, as usual:
```cpp
DEBUG( F( "I am a debug statement stored in PROGMEM" ) );
```
## Not including PrintStream

The PrintStream library contains some useful features, like printing in hexadecimal or binary, setting floating point precision, etc.  
However, there are good reasons why you would not want to include it (e.g. it adds another dependency, it costs a few bytes of extra memory).

You can still use this Debugging library without installing the PrintStream library, by using the macro `PRINTSTREAM_FALLBACK`:
```cpp
#define PRINTSTREAM_FALLBACK
#include "Debug.hpp"
```
